---
category: AI
date: March 2022
headers:
- 'Cache-Control: max-age=86400'
points:
- Successful organizations that have embraced AI think differently about its potential
  and use it as a competitive advantage in their business.
- Valuing collaboration, continuous learning, and end-to-end thinking leads to ongoing
  performance improvements and better utilization of data and technology.
- Leaders must reorient their own thinking and then guide their organizations to adopt
  an AI-enabled mindset for maximum value.
recommended: true
subTitle: Shifting Perspectives and Building Learning Loops
title: 'Embracing an AI-Enabled Mindset: Unlocking the Full Value of Data and Technology'
---

Executives have realized that to capture lasting value at scale with AI, strong foundations are needed, including aligning AI with core business areas, embracing cultural and organizational shifts, and investing in new technology and processes. While many organizations have adopted these practices, the ones that truly succeed in AIthink differently. They engrain AI in their collective mindset and realize its long-term benefits for decision-making, data processing, and business model adaptation. Collaboration, continuous learning, and end-to-end thinking are prioritized over individual knowledge and experience. These organizations also prioritize consistent architectural principles over siloed solutions when combining new technologies with existing infrastructure.

Shifting to an AI-enabled mindset isn't easy, but it's essential for success. Leaders must reorient their thinking and then drive this mindset shift throughout the organization. They should focus on the company's multiple, emphasizing long-term value creation rather than short-term earnings. Global learning loops and technological adaptability should be encouraged at all levels of the organization. Organizations that embrace an AI-enabled mindset are better equipped to tackle technical and cultural obstacles while extracting the full value from data and technology.

To showcase the utility of this mindset shift, we'll share the experiences of two industry giants. A global pharmaceutical company achieved significant reductions in patient-enrollment times and increased productivity by embracing AI. A leading bank aims to reduce time to value for new use cases organization-wide by 50% by adopting an AI-enabled mindset. These success stories highlight the transformative power of an AI-enabled mindset and its potential impact on various industries.

Setting sights on the multiple instead of earnings is crucial when leveraging AI. Rather than focusing on short-term financial gains, leaders at AI-enabled companies understand that AI is a catalyst for transforming day-to-day operations. They use AI to capture and process every relevant event or data point, ensuring more focused and effective actions and decisions. This continuous loop of learning and improved performance sets the stage for long-term value creation.

Getting started requires comprehensive support from all leaders. The CEO plays a critical role in laying the groundwork for this shift. They should explore and share examples of AI-enabled companies, hire AI-experienced talent, reduce hierarchy, prioritize AI education, and consistently communicate the strategic nature of these changes. Forging global learning loops is essential for maintaining growth and knowledge-sharing within the organization. AI-enabled companies build systems and processes that turn individual knowledge into collective wisdom, creating a continuous flow of insights and improvements.

Developing an AI-driven nerve center for managing operations is a powerful way to establish these learning loops. This nerve center captures and shares findings derived from diverse data sources, enabling decision-makers to understand variations and make informed interventions. Standardizing processes and creating integrated protocols are also vital for scaling AI swiftly and successfully. AI-teams can benefit from templates, guides, and best practices, ensuring consistency and collaboration. These protocols are continuously improved through retrospectives and learning loops, enabling teams to deliver new insights more efficiently.

Getting started with learning loops requires focusing on one high-value area of the company and utilizing design To fully understand how employees make decisions and what decision support tools they rely on, it is crucial to grasp the underlying principles. By involving the ultimate users in the process, you can build upon this foundation. Developing a protocol system based solely on theory is challenging, so it is recommended to work on it simultaneously with AI use cases. Start by assessing the current state of AI use cases and the variations in AI practices across the organization. Then, design the desired end state by coaching teams, creating early protocols, and testing them on live projects. As you establish the necessary governance for sustainable adoption, expand access and ownership of the protocol to all future AI teams and projects.

In order to foster continuous learning loops, AI-enabled organizations understand the importance of having the right architectural and end-to-end technology choices in place. Legacy technologies are often ill-suited for an AI-driven world, and adapting them can be costly and time-consuming. In addition, the rapid advancement of AI technologies poses a risk of technical debt and complexity. Therefore, companies must think beyond current requirements and create an infrastructure that allows for easy integration of technologies and seamless transitions to newer ones. This requires a more flexible infrastructure, strong data management capabilities, reusable modular components, and scalable collaboration tools. Alignment of workflows and roles with these technologies is also necessary to fully leverage the benefits of agility and speed. While the transition from old architectures to modern data architectures will take time, viewing technology investments as components contributing to global learning loops is a crucial starting point.

AI-enabled organizations also recognize the importance of adaptability in the process of AI model design for continuous performance improvement. This entails refreshing and improving models as well as monitoring their performance after deployment. To facilitate this, protocols should emphasize the development of reusable tools and components such as model and feature libraries and AI workbenches. These not only expedite the development process by building upon previous experiences and learnings but also ensure compliance by design and explainability. Achieving greater explainability of models is crucial for maintaining learning loops. It enables AI teams to understand the thought processes behind the initial model design, adapt models quickly to market changes, and fix issues caused by rapidly changing customer behavior and market indicators. Furthermore, employees and users who understand how a model works are more likely to trust and utilize it, and they can identify when overriding a recommendation is necessary due to outdated assumptions.

In an AI-enabled organization, it is important to establish the right context and approach for achieving technological adaptability. While there is no one-size-fits-all solution, there are proven blueprints and practices that leading organizations employ to break through the data-architecture gridlock and expedite modernization. Additionally, technology incubators such as innovation labs provide a space for testing and iterating on new AI technologies, techniques, and tools before scaling them throughout the organization.

To assess the progress of becoming an AI-enabled organization, leaders should track performance metrics that demonstrate improvement. For example, tracking clinical-trial performance in a pharmaceutical company involves monitoring metrics such as cost, quality, and revenue. Furthermore, leaders should observe how employees embrace learning and the speed at which learning loops occur. Metrics such as employee contributions to the knowledge ecosystem and the usage of learning systems can provide insights into these aspects.

As businesses continuously acquire new types of data and face fluctuating competitive environments, organizations with an AI-enabled mindset not only recognize these challenges but embrace them. By fostering a culture of curiosity, continuous learning, and improvement, these organizations gain a competitive edge in both AI and their respective industries.