---
title: 'Navigating the Power of Generative AI: Key Questions for Boards'
subTitle:
  Ensuring Value Creation and Risk Management in the Age of Rapid Technological
  Advancements
category: Technology
date: January 2024
headers:
  - 'Cache-Control: max-age=86400'
points:
  - Generative AI has the potential to disrupt operating models in all
    industries, and executives scramble to understand and respond to its power.
  - Boards play a crucial role in supporting CEOs as they navigate the changes
    brought by generative AI, but many are unsure of how to do so effectively.
  - By asking the right questions, boards can help their management teams unlock
    the value of generative AI while managing its risks.
recommended: false
---

As the world grapples with the nascent yet powerful technology of generative AI,
company executives are racing to understand its potential impact and prepare for
what lies ahead. While the early adopters have witnessed its disruptive
capabilities, the role of the board in supporting their CEOs remains unclear.
The fast-paced development and adoption of generative AI further complicate
matters.

To assist board members in effectively guiding their companies through this
transformative era, we have identified four key questions that boards should
consider asking their company leaders. These questions will help align
management's strategic decisions with the power and risks associated with
generative AI.

#### Question 1: How will generative AI shape our industry and company in the short and long term?

Understanding the potential impact of generative AI on industries and businesses
is crucial for developing a sensible strategy. The first wave of applications is
expected to revolutionize software engineering, marketing and sales, customer
service, and product development. Industries heavily reliant on these functions,
such as media and entertainment, banking, consumer goods, telecommunications,
life sciences, and technology companies, will experience the early impact.
However, companies in other sectors must not delay assessing the value
generative AI can bring, given its rapid growth and adoption. Our research shows
that generative AI can increase worker productivity across industries,
potentially adding $7.9 trillion in value globally. Each company must explore
immediate efficiency opportunities while considering the long-term implications
of generative AI on the competitive environment and future-proofing their
strategies and business models.

#### Question 2: Are we striking the right balance between value creation and risk management?

Harnessing the potential of generative AI requires a cautious approach that
balances value creation with risk management. Just like traditional AI,
generative AI presents privacy concerns, ethical risks, and security
vulnerabilities. The technology can perpetuate hidden biases, increase the risk
of security breaches, and infringe on legal protections. Moreover, generative
AI's propensity to generate inaccurate information with authority poses dangers
to both companies and society, fueling concerns of misinformation. To mitigate
these risks, companies must evaluate each use case's value and risks, align them
with the company's risk tolerance and objectives, establish legal and regulatory
frameworks, continually assess unknown risks and ethical concerns, and ensure
effective oversight of generative AI's design and usage.

#### Question 3: How should we organize our company to leverage generative AI effectively?

Unlike previous AI technologies, generative AI requires a coordinated approach
to implementation. Merely conducting pilot projects is insufficient in today's
rapidly evolving environment. Appointing a senior executive responsible for
overseeing generative AI activities and establishing a cross-functional team
comprising data science, engineering, legal, cybersecurity, marketing, and
design experts can expedite strategy formulation and implementation. A
coordinated approach would prioritize use cases that deliver fast, high-impact
results while considering more complex applications. Ensuring strategic
partnerships and alliances with domain-specific experts and infrastructure
providers is also crucial to harness generative AI's full potential while
avoiding vendor lock-in and third-party risks.

#### Question 4: Do we possess the necessary capabilities to leverage generative AI effectively?

To keep up with the pace of generative AI, companies must assess their
technological stack, talent pool, and organizational culture. A modern data and
tech stack, coupled with robust data governance and security procedures, is
essential for success. Companies must identify their AI talent needs, reskill
their workforce, and attract

###### References

- [PwC: The power of AI and generative AI: what boards should know](https://www.pwc.com/us/en/services/governance-insights-center/library/ai-governance-and-boards.html)
- [McKinsey: Four Essential Questions for Boards to Ask About Generative AI](https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/quantumblack/our-insights/four-essential-questions-for-boards-to-ask-about-generative-ai)
- [Deloitte: AI Governance for Board Members](https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/pages/consulting/articles/generative-ai-governance-risk-management.html)
