---
title: The Power of Gen AI in Real Estate
subTitle: Unlocking Value and Innovating the Industry
category: Real Estate
date: December 2023
headers:
  - 'Cache-Control: max-age=86400'
points:
  - Gen AI is revolutionizing the real estate industry by utilizing vast amounts
    of data to perform specialized tasks, opening up new revenue streams and
    transforming key operations.
  - Gen AI offers a fresh opportunity for the industry to learn from the past
    and embrace cutting-edge technology, leading to potential value generation
    of $110 billion to $180 billion.
  - While the implementation of gen AI has presented challenges, real estate
    organizations can realize its full potential by taking strategic actions and
    embracing a new way of working.
recommended: true
---

Generative AI (Gen AI) is ushering in a new era of innovation in the real estate
industry. With access to a wealth of data about properties, communities,
tenants, and the market, investors can leverage Gen AI tools to revolutionize
various aspects of the industry. These tools can help identify investment
opportunities, transform building and interior design, create effective
marketing materials, and enhance customer experiences, ultimately leading to new
revenue streams. The impact of Gen AI on the real estate industry cannot be
underestimated.

#### Embracing Generative AI

- Analytical AI, which has been shaping the business world for decades, focuses
  on specific goals and tasks, such as predicting future values or segmenting
  customers. Gen AI, on the other hand, introduces an open-ended and creative
  approach to AI, unlocking new possibilities that analytical AI cannot address.
  According to the McKinsey Global Institute, Gen AI has the potential to
  generate a staggering $110 billion to $180 billion in value for the real
  estate industry.

  _McKinsey identified 63 generative AI use cases spanning 16 business functions
  that could deliver total value in the range of $2.6 trillion to $4.4 trillion
  in economic benefits annually when applied across industries.
  [source](https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/the-economic-potential-of-generative-ai-the-next-productivity-frontier#introduction)_

This presents a significant opportunity for Real estate companies that
strategically align their tech infrastructure to facilitate future use cases
will position themselves for optimal success. Taking deliberate steps to
integrate vendor systems and streamline data across property management,
customer relations, and maintenance portals will yield fruitful results. It is
crucial for companies to adopt an operating model that can scale alongside the
growth and diversification of their real estate portfolio. This may involve
redefining roles and capabilities to align with the evolving focus points of
work, such as employing prompt and data engineers to implement foundational
models.

By leveraging Gen AI tools, existing employees can transition away from
time-consuming tasks and concentrate on specialized assignments. The advent of
Gen AI also presents opportunities for the creation of new roles and skill sets
in areas like marketing and investing teams. In order to embrace these changes,
companies must be willing to adapt and recognize that their IT or marketing
organization will undergo a transformation with the integration of AI
technology.

> “Location, location, location” is no longer the only determinant of strategic
> advantage in real estate; firms increasingly realize that “accurate, timely,
> and comprehensive data”
>
> \- Deloitte Center for Financial Services

#### Risks of Gen AI to Real Estate

It is important to acknowledge and address the unique risks that Gen AI poses to
the real estate industry. As this technology is relatively new and constantly
evolving, there may be unintentional biases in training data that lead to
unintended consequences. Furthermore, concerns surrounding intellectual property
and legal precedents related to foundational models need to be monitored. For
instance, if marketing content is generated by an algorithm trained on
unlicensed images, it poses a risk to the real estate business. Adjustments made
to the foundational models supporting real estate-specific tools may also have
unforeseen impacts on output quality and content.

Companies must take steps to mitigate these risks and continually improve their
approaches. Certain use cases, such as emergency response or leasing decisions
that require regulatory compliance, may not be suitable for Gen AI at its
current stage. Implementing Gen AI in situations where investment professionals,
operating teams, and tenants interact introduces additional risks that need
careful consideration. Companies that identify and address risks early on will
be better equipped to respond effectively.

#### Catalysts for AI in Real Estate

Two primary factors make it opportune for the real estate industry to embrace
Gen AI.

1. The technology has advanced to a point where it can provide groundbreaking
   solutions to the challenges faced by real estate companies. With proper
   design and execution, Gen AI can be a game-changer.

2. The commercial real estate sector currently faces numerous challenges and
   demands innovative approaches. Gen AI does not replace analytical AI but
   instead opens up new use cases that were previously inconceivable and
   relevant to previously untouched aspects of the real estate value chain.
   Despite being labeled as a tech laggard, the real estate industry can
   actually benefit from not overinvesting in outdated technology. While there
   may be a steeper learning curve for those yet to invest in technology and
   data strategies, the insights, speed, and transformative power of Gen AI in
   the real estate industry make it a journey worth embarking on. Data
   utilization and strategic differentiation through data will be the
   battleground for securing investor dollars, tenants, buyers, and long-term
   success.

#### Takeaway

The real estate industry is undeniably undergoing significant changes. The
question is, which companies will answer the call for change, adapt to the new
landscape, and embrace a digitally empowered future.

###### References:

- [EY: Generative AI In Real Estate & Hospitality Construction](https://www.ey.com/en_us/real-estate-hospitality-construction/generative-ai-in-real-estate)
- [Deloitte: Generative AI in real estate ](https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/industry/financial-services/generative-ai-in-real-estate-benefits.html)
- [McKinsey: Generative AI Can Change Real Estate](https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/real-estate/our-insights/generative-ai-can-change-real-estate-but-the-industry-must-change-to-reap-the-benefits)
- [McKinsey: The Economic Potential of Generative AI](https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/the-economic-potential-of-generative-ai-the-next-productivity-frontier#introduction)
